README.md, before:

# 🧠 TEXT-SUMMARIZE-TOOL

**Company:** CodTech IT Solutions  
**Name:** Shreyash Nhanu Desai  
**Intern ID:** CT04DR1291 

**Domain:** Artificial Intelligence 

**Duration:** 4 Weeks  
**Mentor:** Neela Santosh  

---

## 📘 Project Overview

The **Text Summarize Tool** is an AI-based project that uses **Natural Language Processing (NLP)** to automatically generate concise summaries from lengthy articles or text documents.  

This tool demonstrates how modern NLP models can understand human language and extract meaningful information efficiently — saving time and improving productivity.

---

## 🚀 Features

- 🧩 Summarizes long paragraphs into concise, readable text  
- ⚙️ Built using state-of-the-art **transformer models**  
- 💬 Simple command-line interface for input and output  
- 🔍 Supports multiple languages (with Hugging Face multilingual models)  
- 💾 Lightweight and easily deployable  

---

## 🛠️ Technologies Used

- **Programming Language:** Python  
- **Libraries:**  
  - `transformers` – for AI summarization model  
  - `torch` – for deep learning backend  
  - `nltk` – for text preprocessing (optional)  

---

## 💻 How to Run

🪜 Step 1️⃣ — Install Git

If you don’t already have Git installed, download it here:
👉 https://git-scm.com/downloads

During setup, check “Add Git to PATH” ✅

After installation, verify:

git --version

1. Clone this repository:
   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/ShreyashDesai/TEXT-SUMMARIZATION-TOOL.git
   cd TEXT-SUMMARIZATION-TOOL
   ```
--

2. Install dependencies:
   ```bash
   pip install -r requirements.txt
   ```

3. Run the script:
   ```bash
   python text_summarize_tool.py
   ```

4. Enter any text or article when prompted — the tool will generate a concise AI summary.

---

## 🧩 Example Output

**Input:**
> Artificial Intelligence (AI) is transforming industries by automating complex tasks, improving decision-making, and driving innovation...

**Summary:**
> AI enhances automation, innovation, and decision-making across industries.

---
<img width="1215" height="667" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/cbf5cc21-682d-49d5-945b-f70e17b89c73" />

--
🧠 Model Information

Model: sshleifer/distilbart-cnn-12-6

This is a distilled version of BART, optimized for efficient and high-quality text summarization.
--
## 👨‍💻 Author

**Shreyash Desai**  
*Intern at CodTech IT Solutions*  
📧 [sheyashsn.desai@gmail.com]  
🔗 [GitHub Profile](https://github.com/<Shreyash Desai>)

🔗 [Connect with me on LinkedIn](https://www.linkedin.com/in/shreyash-desai-a13730384/)


---

## 🏁 Acknowledgements

I would like to thank **CodTech IT Solutions** and my mentor **Neela Santosh** for providing this opportunity and guidance during the internship.

---

Commit message:

Update README with project details and instructions

README.md, after:

# 🧠 TEXT-SUMMARIZE-TOOL

**Company:** CodTech IT Solutions  
**Name:** Shreyash Nhanu Desai  
**Intern ID:** CT04DR1291 

**Domain:** Artificial Intelligence 

**Duration:** 4 Weeks  
**Mentor:** Neela Santosh  

---

## 📘 Project Overview

The **Text Summarize Tool** is an AI-based project that uses **Natural Language Processing (NLP)** to automatically generate concise summaries from lengthy articles or text documents.  

This tool demonstrates how modern NLP models can understand human language and extract meaningful information efficiently — saving time and improving productivity.

---

## 🚀 Features

- 🧩 Summarizes long paragraphs into concise, readable text  
- ⚙️ Built using state-of-the-art **transformer models**  
- 💬 Simple command-line interface for input and output  
- 🔍 Supports multiple languages (with Hugging Face multilingual models)  
- 💾 Lightweight and easily deployable  

---

## 🛠️ Technologies Used

- **Programming Language:** Python  
- **Libraries:**  
  - `transformers` – for AI summarization model  
  - `torch` – for deep learning backend  
  - `nltk` – for text preprocessing (optional)  

---

## 💻 How to Run
--

🪜 Setup Instructions
✅ Step 1: Install Git (64-bit)

If Git isn’t installed, download the 64-bit version here:
👉 https://git-scm.com/downloads

During setup, ensure ✅ “Add Git to PATH” is checked.

To verify installation:

git --version

--

1. Clone this repository:
   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/ShreyashDesai/TEXT-SUMMARIZATION-TOOL.git
   cd TEXT-SUMMARIZATION-TOOL
   ```
--

2. Install dependencies:
   ```bash
   pip install -r requirements.txt
   ```

3. Run the script:
   ```bash
   python text_summarize_tool.py
   ```

4. Enter any text or article when prompted — the tool will generate a concise AI summary.

---

## 🧩 Example Output

**Input:**
> Artificial Intelligence (AI) is transforming industries by automating complex tasks, improving decision-making, and driving innovation...

**Summary:**
> AI enhances automation, innovation, and decision-making across industries.

---
<img width="1215" height="667" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/cbf5cc21-682d-49d5-945b-f70e17b89c73" />

--
🧠 Model Information

Model: sshleifer/distilbart-cnn-12-6

This is a distilled version of BART, optimized for efficient and high-quality text summarization.
--
## 👨‍💻 Author

**Shreyash Desai**  
*Intern at CodTech IT Solutions*  
📧 [sheyashsn.desai@gmail.com]  
🔗 [GitHub Profile](https://github.com/<Shreyash Desai>)

🔗 [Connect with me on LinkedIn](https://www.linkedin.com/in/shreyash-desai-a13730384/)


---

## 🏁 Acknowledgements

I would like to thank **CodTech IT Solutions** and my mentor **Neela Santosh** for providing this opportunity and guidance during the internship.

---
